.. _BZ:

BZ
==

When ``BZ`` is present, information on a polymer, layer, or crystal is
written to a file, <file>.brz.  This information can be used by the
`program BZ <Program_BZ.html>`__ to explore the band structure in the
Brillouin zone of the solid.

Do not attempt to add keyword ``BZ``.  Use the utility program
`MAKPOL <makpol.html>`__ with keyword "LET" - that will make a data set
in the correct format.

In order for ``BZ`` to work, certain specific conditions must be
satisfied, these are:

#. The data set must consist of a set of fundamental unit cells, in a
   specific order.  For a solid, the order of unit cells is (0,0,0),
   (1,0,0), (2,0,0), ... (0,1,0), (1,1,0), ... (0,0,1), (1,0,1),
   ...(0,1,1), (1,1,1), ... (n,l,m).  Within each unit cell, the order
   of the atoms must be exactly the same.  Because these conditions make
   writing the data set very difficult, the utility program
   `MAKPOL <makpol.html>`__ should always be used to create the data
   set.  MAKPOL is normally used for generating data sets for modeling
   the chemistry of solids, mainly organic systems, so the default in
   MAKPOL is for the data set to consist of entire molecules.  For
   band-structure work, an extra keyword "LET" must be added; this
   suppresses the operation that generates entire molecules, and instead
   makes a data set suitable for use with ``BZ``.
    
#. When "LET" is present, only the atoms that make up the unit cell
   should be present.  The unit cell must also be stoichiometric, that
   is, there must be an exact integer multiple of the formula present. 
   For example, TiO\ :sub:`2` in the rutile structure has a unit cell
   with one titanium atom at a vertex and one at the center of the
   tetragonal unit cell.   There must also be four oxygen atoms, two
   inside the unit cell and two on the surface of the unit cell.
    
#. Keyword MERS must be present.  This is written out when MAKPOL is
   run, and it should not be edited or deleted. 
    
#. The Large Unit Cell (LUC) used must be sufficiently large that all
   phenomena relating to solid-state effects would not change if the LUC
   was increased in size.  This condition is normally satisfied if the
   LUC could hold a sphere of diameter 9 Ångstroms.  For narrow band gap
   solids (the semiconductors) and true metals, the LUC might need to be
   larger, for example big enough to hold a sphere of diameter 10 or 11
   Ångstroms.
    
#. The geometry should not be modified after MAKPOL is run.  This means
   that if geometry optimization is run, the optimized geometry should
   then be used in constructing a new data set for MAKPOL.

Two types of file can be generated by BZ: electronic band structure
files and phonon band structure files.  If an electronic band structure
is needed, then at least one SCF calculation must be run, and a normal
output must be generated, i.e., an output that includes the line "FINAL
HEAT OF FORMATION"  If a phonon band structure is needed, then a
```FORCE`` <force.html>`__ calculation must be run.  This calculation
normally takes a long time to run, so a useful strategy is to write out
the force matrix (using ```ISOTOPE`` <isotope.html>`__) as an insurance
in case anything goes wrong.  If something does go wrong, then correct
the error and use ```RESTART`` <RESTART.html>`__ to re-run the end of
the job.

To summarize, for an electronic band structure calculation, use keywords
``BZ`` ``MERS=(n1,n2,n3)`` and possibly ```1SCF`` <one_scf.html>`__,
together with a data set generated by the program MAKPOL.  For a phonon
band structure calculation, use keywords ``BZ`` ``MERS=(n1,n2,n3)``
``FORCE`` and possibly ``RESTART``,

 

 
