.. _CdotIdotDdot:

``C.I.D.``
==========

``C.I.D=n, C.I.D.=(n,m)`` 

Available for ```INDO`` <indo.html>`__-based CI calculations only. The
active space for double excitations includes *n* M.O.s. If only *n* is
specified, the *n* M.O.s which ‘bracket’ the occupied-virtual energy
levels are selected. (see C.I.=\ *n* for details). In
C.I.D.=(\ *n*,\ *m*), *n* is the number of M.O.s in the active space,
and *m* is the number of doubly filled (that is, not empty or partially
filled) levels to be used.

By default, if ```CISD`` <cisd.html>`__ is specified, an active space of
10 M.O.s (or the same active space as single excitations, if this is
smaller) is used.

To generate double excitations, all single excitations specified by C.I.
are generated. For each single excitation, all double excitations within
the active space generated by C.I.D. are generated. For example, if
C.I.=6, one of the single excitations is (HOMO-2, LUMO+2). If C.I.D.=2,
this single excitation will be used to generate the double excitation
(HOMO-2, HOMO, LUMO, LUMO+2), where both M.O.s involved in the second
excitation are within the smaller active space specified by C.I.D., even
though the original single excitation involves orbitals outside the
C.I.D. active space.

For a ``CISD`` calculation, the number of excitations that are generated
is approximately:

(CI(m) \* CI(n-m)) \* (CID(m) \* CID(n-m))

Even if the ```MAXCI`` <maxci.html>`__ keyword is used to limit the size
of the CI matrix, generating and computing the energies of doubly
excited electron configurations can become computationally expensive if
a large active space for double excitations is used.
